---
layout: project
title: Pulsed Plasma Thruster
author: StrathSEDS PPT team
excerpt: StrathSEDS' Ion Engine project # Must be provided
---
## Overview

StrathSEDS is working on an electric propulsion project by designing, building and testing a propulsion unit called a Pulsed Plasma Thruster (PPT). Electrical propulsion units are a large area of research and growth in aerospace due to the high propellant efficiency levels achieved, leading to reduced propellant mass. PPTs are one of the simplest forms of electric propulsion and may find uses in CubeSats and other larger satellites for many purposes, including station-keeping and de-orbiting.

## General Principles

Electrical propulsion units generate thrust by expelling charged material at high velocity. This high velocity compensates for the very low fuel flow rate. A PPT specifically works by turning the fuel into plasma and using that plasma to close a circuit between two charged plates. Once the circuit is complete, electricity discharges between the charged plates. This flow of electrons generates a strong electromagnetic field (JxB field) which creates a Lorentz force on the plasma which accelerates it out the exhaust at high speed.

PPT fuel tends to be solid PTFE (Teflon©), or other solid fuels. Solid fuels present a storage benefit and increase simplicity, but some PPTs do make use of liquid or gaseous fuels although these are in the minority. In most PPTs, the solid fuel is ablated by a spark generated by a spark plug. The temperatures generated in this spark provide enough energy to the resulting gas to generate plasma which then passed between the charged plates, resulting in the Lorentz force discussed above.

## StrathSEDS Design

The PPT being built by StrathSEDS is a test device and not designed for use on spacecraft. The main purpose of the PPT was to test different layouts, mainly in the orientation of separation of the charged plates. As such, the design incorporates fully adjustable plate clamps. This allows the distance between the plates to be adjusted to find the optimum voltage/plate separation combination. The plates can also be angled, allowing testing to determine if angling the plates together could increase efficiency by concentrating the magnetic field as the voltage drops, and by creating a nozzle.

Another feature of the StrathSEDS design is the structure which allows for nozzle or diffuser designs to be tested, to identify efficiency improvements from different exhaust designs.

The plates are arranged horizontally, allowing glass plates above and below the plates to be used to observe the PPT in use in the vacuum chamber. Being able to view the PPT in operation may provide an opportunity to find design improvements to increase the efficiency of PPTs.

## Testing Results

Results will be posted here following completion of testing.
